Simulator migration guide (#1023)
Qiskit/documentation: docs/api/migration-guides/local-simulators.mdx

---
title: Migrate to local simulators

> description: Migrate from using the IBM Quantum cloud simulators (such as ibmq_qasm_simulator) to using local simulators.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
description: Migrate from using the IBM Quantum cloud simulators (such as `ibmq_qasm_simulator`) to using local simulators.
```

I assume we can use code syntax in metadata descriptions but lmk if im wrong 🤔

Author: It seems unnecessary to add code syntax in text that's not actually meant to be seen, so I just changed the text.

---

# Migrate to local simulators

> In quantum computing, the choice between using simulators and quantum hardware is crucial for making progress in the field. While simulators are useful for testing and debugging, in this era of quantum utility, quantum development and industry advancement requires actual hardware. As part of the move to quantum utility, IBM Quantum&trade; will retire its cloud simulators on 15 May 2024. This guide explains in more detail why this is happening, and how to change from cloud to local simulators. 

Reviewer: I think in the intro it would be worth emphasising that the "cloud simulators" are the ones people access through runtime, and maybe even listing the simulator names would be good. I think internally we have become familiar with the term "cloud simulators" but I worry that external users won't know what we mean and might panic that all simulators are being removed

## Why are the cloud simulators being retired?

The cloud simulators are being retired for several reasons:

> ### Simulators have limitations

Reviewer: This section about why the cloud simulators are being retired feels very long, should we turn each of the "reasons" a twisty instead? so people can more quickly get to the code changes if they don't care about the whys

Interacting with quantum hardware grows skills and experience unattainable by only using simulators: 

- Direct interaction with quantum hardware builds skills because you must implement or use error mitigation or suppression techniques, for reliable computation.

- Hands-on experience with quantum hardware develops a deeper understanding of quantum phenomena and how to tailor algorithms to the characteristics of quantum processors.

- Engaging with quantum hardware results in practical insights into the challenges and opportunities of quantum computing, enhancing developers' ability to drive innovation in the field.

## Algorithms should be adapted for quantum hardware

Successful quantum algorithms must be adapted to exploit the capabilities of quantum hardware, optimizing performance and efficiency.

- Quantum hardware provides a more accurate representation of real-world quantum systems than simulators.

- Fine-tuning algorithms for quantum hardware involves adjusting ansatz, circuit implementations, parameters, and configuration to maximize performance.  This process is best achieved through direct experimentation with quantum hardware.
 

## When should simulators be used?

> Quantum simulators should be used to help develop and test programs before fine-tuning them and sending them to quantum hardware. Local simulators can do this with good performance and efficiency.  Clifford circuits can be simulated very efficiently, and results can be verified. This is useful to give confidence in an experiment.

Reviewer: I like this section about "when should simulators be used", could we include this detail in the verify intro page as well?

## Migrate to local simulators

> To replace cloud simulators, you can now use local testing mode instead. Depending on your needs, there are several ways to use local testing mode. 

Reviewer 2: Just to be explicit which local testing mode we are talking about

```suggestion
To replace cloud simulators, you can now use Qiskit Runtime local testing mode instead. Depending on your needs, there are several ways to use local testing mode. 
```

Reviewer 2: We should also add that you need `qiskit-ibm-runtime` release 0.22.0 or higher to use this local testing mode.

> To replace cloud simulators, you can now use local testing mode instead. Depending on your needs, there are several ways to use local testing mode. 

Reviewer: can you specify that it's the "runtime" local testing mode

### Fake backends
 

> To use local testing mode, specify one of the fake backends in ``qiskit_ibm_runtime.fake_provider`` or specify a Qiskit Aer backend when instantiating a primitive or a session.  For details on fake backends, see the [fake_provider API reference.](/api/qiskit-ibm-runtime/fake_provider)

Reviewer 2: Shouldn't this sentence 

> To use local testing mode, specify one of the fake backends in qiskit_ibm_runtime.fake_provider or specify a Qiskit Aer backend when instantiating a primitive or a session.

be under the previous paragraph (`Migrate to local simulators`) ? Then this part can get into more details about fake backends, e.g. 

`
The [fake backends](https://docs.quantum.ibm.com/api/qiskit-ibm-runtime/fake_provider) are built to mimic the behaviors of IBM Quantum systems using system snapshots. The system snapshots contain important information about the quantum system such as coupling map, basis gates, qubit properties, which are useful for testing the transpiler and performing noisy simulations of the system.
`

> To use local testing mode, specify one of the fake backends in ``qiskit_ibm_runtime.fake_provider`` or specify a Qiskit Aer backend when instantiating a primitive or a session.  For details on fake backends, see the [fake_provider API reference.](/api/qiskit-ibm-runtime/fake_provider)

Reviewer: this sentence felt a bit clunky after the intro above it. It's sort of mentions both the aer backend way and the fake backend way when the subheading implies it should only focus on the fake backend way. I think something like this is clearer:

```suggestion
You can use local testing mode with a fake backend that mimics the layout and connectivity of the real backends accessible through Qiskit Runtime. To do so, specify one of the fake backends in ``qiskit_ibm_runtime.fake_provider`` when instantiating a primitive or a session.  For details on fake backends, see the [fake_provider API reference.](/api/qiskit-ibm-runtime/fake_provider)
```

Author: This one was moved up for clarity.

```python
from qiskit.circuit.library import RealAmplitudes
from qiskit.circuit import QuantumCircuit, QuantumRegister, ClassicalRegister
from qiskit.quantum_info import SparsePauliOp
from qiskit.transpiler.preset_passmanagers import generate_preset_pass_manager
from qiskit_ibm_runtime import SamplerV2 as Sampler
from qiskit_ibm_runtime.fake_provider import FakeManilaV2

# Bell Circuit
qc = QuantumCircuit(2)
qc.h(0)
qc.cx(0, 1)
qc.measure_all()

# Run the sampler job locally using FakeManilaV2
fake_manila = FakeManilaV2()
pm = generate_preset_pass_manager(backend=fake_manila, optimization_level=1)
isa_qc = pm.run(qc)

> sampler = Sampler(backend=fake_manila)

Reviewer 2: I figured we should give an example on using options. 

```suggestion
# You can use a fixed seed to get fixed results. 
options = {"simulator": {"seed_simulator": 42}}
sampler = Sampler(backend=fake_manila, options=options)
```

> result = sampler.run([(isa_qc)]).result()

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
result = sampler.run([isa_qc]).result()
```

```        

### AerSimulator

> You can use local testing mode to use simulators from [Qiskit Aer](/verify/simulate-with-qiskit-aer), which allow you to model noise.

Reviewer 2: Qiskit Aer gives you more than just model noise, especially since fake backends can also model noise. Perhaps something like

`
You can use local testing mode with simulators from Qiskit Aer, which provides higher-performance simulation that can handle larger circuits and custom noise models. It also supports Clifford simulation mode, which can efficiently simulate Clifford circuits with a large number of qubits. 
`

> Example without noise:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Example without noise and uses Session:
```

```python
from qiskit_aer import AerSimulator
from qiskit.circuit.library import RealAmplitudes
from qiskit.circuit import QuantumCircuit, QuantumRegister, ClassicalRegister
from qiskit.quantum_info import SparsePauliOp
from qiskit.transpiler.preset_passmanagers import generate_preset_pass_manager
from qiskit_ibm_runtime import Session, SamplerV2 as Sampler

# Bell Circuit
qc = QuantumCircuit(2)
qc.h(0)
qc.cx(0, 1)
qc.measure_all()

# Run the sampler job locally using AerSimulator.

> # Session syntax is supported but ignored because simulators don't support sessions.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
# Session syntax is supported but ignored because local mode doesn't support sessions.
```

aer_sim = AerSimulator()
pm = generate_preset_pass_manager(backend=aer_sim, optimization_level=1)
isa_qc = pm.run(qc)
with Session(backend=aer_sim) as session:
    sampler = Sampler(session=session)
    result = sampler.run([(isa_qc)]).result()
```

> To simulate with noise, specify a system (quantum hardware) and submit it to Aer.  Aer builds a noise model based on the calibration data from that system, and instantiates an Aer backend with that model.  If you prefer, you can [build a noise model](/verify/building_noise_models).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To simulate with noise, specify a system (quantum hardware) and submit it to Aer.  Aer builds a noise model based on the calibration data from that system, and instantiates an Aer backend with that model.  If you prefer, you can also [build a custom noise model](/verify/building_noise_models).
```

Example with noise: 

```python
from qiskit_aer import AerSimulator
from qiskit.circuit.library import RealAmplitudes
from qiskit.circuit import QuantumCircuit, QuantumRegister, ClassicalRegister
from qiskit.quantum_info import SparsePauliOp
from qiskit.transpiler.preset_passmanagers import generate_preset_pass_manager
from qiskit_ibm_runtime import SamplerV2 as Sampler

# Bell Circuit
qc = QuantumCircuit(2)
qc.h(0)
qc.cx(0, 1)
qc.measure_all()

service = QiskitRuntimeService()

# Specify a system to use for the noise model
real_backend = service.backend("ibm_brisbane")
aer = AerSimulator.from_backend(real_backend)

# Run the sampler job locally using AerSimulator.
pm = generate_preset_pass_manager(backend=aer, optimization_level=1)
isa_qc = pm.run(qc)
sampler = Sampler(backend=aer)
result = sampler.run([isa_qc]).result()
```

<span id="clifford-sim"></span>

> ### Clifford simulation

Reviewer: In this section you can tell people to see a more in depth example of clifford simulation with aer here: https://docs.quantum.ibm.com/verify/stabilizer-circuit-simulation

> Because Clifford circuits can be simulated efficiently with verifiable results, Clifford simulation is a very useful tool. 

Reviewer 2: We can link to the doc that goes into more details about Clifford simulation: https://docs.quantum.ibm.com/verify/stabilizer-circuit-simulation

---
title: Migrate to local simulators
description: Migrate from using the IBM Quantum cloud simulators (such as ibmq_qasm_simulator) to using local simulators

---

<span id="local-simulators"></span>
# Migrate to local simulators

> In quantum computing, the choice between using simulators and quantum hardware is crucial for making progress in the field. While simulators are useful for testing and debugging, in this era of quantum utility, quantum development and industry advancement requires actual hardware. As part of the move to quantum utility, IBM Quantum&trade; will retire its cloud simulators on 15 May, 2024. This guide explains in more detail why this is happening, and how (and when) to change from cloud to local simulators. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In quantum computing, the choice between using simulators and quantum hardware is crucial for making progress in the field. While simulators are useful for testing and debugging, in this era of quantum utility, quantum development and industry advancement requires actual hardware. As part of the move to quantum utility, IBM Quantum&trade; will retire its cloud simulators on 15 May 2024. This guide explains in more detail why this is happening, and how (and when) to change from cloud to local simulators. 
```

## Why are the cloud simulators being retired?

The cloud simulators are being retired for several reasons:

### Simulators have limitations

Simulators have their uses, but they are too limited to use for research or experimentation:

> - Simulators are valuable for understanding small-scale quantum systems, but their usefulness maxes out at around 50 qubits, even with access to high performance supercomputers. This ceiling is a result of the exponential growth in computational resources required to simulate larger quantum systems (review [Massively parallel quantum computer simulator, eleven years later](https://arxiv.org/abs/1805.04708) for the full explanation).  Exploring quantum systems of 100 qubits and more requires hardware.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Simulators are valuable for understanding small-scale quantum systems, but their usefulness maxes out at around 50 qubits, even with access to high-performance supercomputers. This ceiling is a result of the exponential growth in computational resources required to simulate larger quantum systems (review [Massively parallel quantum computer simulator, eleven years later](https://arxiv.org/abs/1805.04708) for the full explanation).  Exploring quantum systems of 100 qubits and more requires hardware.
```

- While some simulators offer noise models, it is a very hard problem to capture the entire dynamics of a real QPU. Quantum hardware offers the potential for researchers to confront the challenges inherent in quantum systems, such as noise, errors, and decoherence in a realistic testing environment.

### Using quantum hardware builds unique skills

> Interacting with quantum hardware grows skills and experience unatainable by only using simulators: 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Interacting with quantum hardware grows skills and experience unattainable by only using simulators: 
```

- Direct interaction with quantum hardware builds skills because you must implement or use error mitigation techniques, such as error correction and suppression, for reliable computation.

- Hands-on experience with quantum hardware develops a deeper understanding of quantum phenomena and tailor algorithms to the characteristics of quantum processors.

- Engaging with quantum hardware results in practical insights into the challenges and opportunities of quantum computing, enhancing developers' ability to drive innovation in the field.

## Algorithms should be adapted for quantum hardware

Successful quantum algorithms must be adapted to exploit the capabilities of quantum hardware, optimizing performance and efficiency.

- Quantum hardware provides a more accurate representation of real-world quantum systems than simulators.

> - Fine-tuning algorithms for quantum hardware involves adjusting Ansatz, circuit implementations, parameters, and configuration to maximize performance.  This process is best achieved through direct experimentation with quantum hardware.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Fine-tuning algorithms for quantum hardware involves adjusting ansatz, circuit implementations, parameters, and configuration to maximize performance.  This process is best achieved through direct experimentation with quantum hardware.
```

 

## When should simulators be used?

> Quantum simulators should be used to help develop and test programs before fine-tuning them and sending them to quantum hardware. This can be done with good performance and efficiency on local simulators. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Quantum simulators should be used to help develop and test programs before fine-tuning them and sending them to quantum hardware. Local simulators can do this with good performance and efficiency. 
```
